Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com.
. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman. This is another episode
of Hansel minutes. And today
I'm talking with Pam and
Cine from open collective and
democracy earth. How are you?
Good, Scott, how are you?
I'm great. I'm very excited
to talk to you today
because I'm hearing more and
more from my friends, from
my community about OpenCollective and
how exciting it is for
people doing open source projects.
So I started digging around
and trying to learn more
about you, your background and
the kinds of things that
you've been involved in. And
it sounds like you have
a very deep interest in
democracy as a concept Indeed.
And most of my career
has been revolved around democracy
and politics. So that's my
background. That's where I come
from. And that's certainly where
my interest lies. Where did
that start? Have you, were
you a, like a child
always interested in 10 years
old in democracy or when
did this That's excellent. That
is actually true. I've always
been interested in politics. Like
my house was how's where
we would fight for over
them. The newspaper in the
mornings and, and politics was
always part of the conversation.
So I was always interested
in democracy and institutions in
general and how they affect
us. And I worked in
politics most of my life
from sort of every aspect
of it from think-tanks to
campaigning, to running for office,
myself, to working for government.
So it's been, it's been
quite a challenging ride. Did
you always agree with your
parents and your family as
you argued? Or did you,
how did you develop your
own perspective or did you
adopt theirs? Well, my family
has like a very political
history from very different ideological
viewpoints. So it's, it's hard
to agree with. It was
always hard to agree with
everyone and to fight with
everyone. So I think that
I've been kind of molded
in a way by, by
those conversations, but definitely well,
depends on the period of
my life. I was more
combative if you want. In
my teenage years, I definitely
wouldn't see eye to eye
with my father in most
of the conversations, but I
dunno it sometimes it's hard
to pick what's ideology and
what's just growing up, right?
What is liquid democracy? So
liquid democracy is it's an
understanding of democracy that kind
of removes the territorial basis
for legitimacy and power. Essentially,
the way our institutions are
structured, our political system is
structured today, revolves around the
territory. And we are represented
by people, professional citizens that
we called politicians or representatives.
And we are represented because
of the place that we
happen to be living at
or worse where we were
born in. And it would
democracy proposes to flip that
equation and say that we
can actually be represented by
anyone. There's no reason why
I can only be represented
by Argentina or Argentinian representatives.
I'd rather be maybe represented
by, I don't know, say
on climate change by
or a group of likeminded
individuals or a city that
is extremely progressive in their
energy policies, but we are
kind of stuck to the
territorial basis for political organizations
because that's what we've inherited
because of the time that
our political institutions were designed,
the best communication technology at
the time was, was the
post the mail. And so
there wasn't really a lot
more that they could design,
but that obviously the internet
changed that and our political
institutions did not change with
times. And so what we
propose is a system that
where we can allocate our
power, our decision to different
people for different topics, regardless
of where we're living or
where we were born. So
as a concept of liquid
democracy, but we flipped the
idea of representation from a
vertical territorial notion of representation,
where we essentially outsource our
decision making to a group
of people for four years
or two years or six
years. But for very long
period of time that they
decide on our behalf on
all topics, which in my
mind is just, it really
blows my mind. And the
idea of liquid democracy is
that we can, everyone, anyone
can be a representative, so
we can allocate that we
can trust different people for
different topics. So they have
different expertise or different experiences
regardless of, of where they
are. That's really interesting the
way that you, the way
that you phrase it kind
of does make it a
little bit disturbing that we
would pick one individual or
two individuals from our state
and then give them authority
over all topics, even if
they have zero expertise in
that topic. Right. Right. Which
is essentially what we do.
And I think that what
we're seeing today in terms
of kind of the turmoil
that we're seeing in many
democracies has to do a
little bit with this has
to do with that a
model that is not able
to respond to the preferences
of citizens that have preferences
that go beyond the territory.
And at the same time,
it's not able to update
itself. And so there's this,
at least in my mind,
I'm seeing this kind of
situation where our government is
very out of sync with
who we are and how
we act. And so we
are stuck with these institutions
that we inherited, but my
argument is that, or is
that we're not bound to
them. We own them. And
so we can, and I
think it's our responsibility. Not
only that we can, I
think we should redesign them
and rethink them with the
current technology that we have.
And with the current set
of values and beliefs and
uneconomic settings that we have
today, like institutions are not
created in a void. They
respond to a certain period,
asserting education, certain economic model,
a certain technology existing at
one point in time. And
when all of that changes,
we must update our institutions.
It seems like it's the
updating of institutions or the
stopping the inertia of, of
any number of historical documents
that I think at least
folks in America. Cause I
can only speak as an
American get uncomfortable with whether
it be something that was
a, you know, stone tablets
that were several thousand years
ago or whether they were
a piece of parchment from
a couple of hundred years
ago, they feel that certain
things should be sacrosanct and
permanent. So the idea of
updating something, whether it be
because the internet or whatever
scares people. Yeah. And look,
it makes sense. And I
think it's not a process
that we should take lightly,
but I think that it's
innovation needs to take place
in this, in these spaces.
And it's very difficult for
the start of school to
innovate because it's against their
nature, right? Like power is
conservative by nature. It wants
just power. So expecting the
center, expecting the status quo,
the establishment to innovate it's
it's few child because it's
simply not their interest. Their
preference is history. It's always
going to be to hold
onto power. That's how the
system is designed. So I
think that there's, you know,
what's interesting about exploring these
options in, in, in the
fringes is that innovation is
less expensive in the fringes.
And so it's easier to
propose kind of radical ideas
and start testing them in
kind of sun boxes. Right.
And then, and, and then
eventually those sandboxes are gonna
get bigger or those ideas
are going to get more
mainstream and it's, you know,
eventually we're going to end
up updating our political system.
I mean, I I'm, I'm
an optimist that might be
ever to aura or a
flaw, but I am, I
am an optimist. And I,
and I think that if
we want to kind of
push the boundaries of, of
what it's doable, we need
to start sort of building
alternative models and we start,
we need to start sort
of moving them the perception
of what is doable. So
you talk about sandboxes. So
people who are listening to
this podcast might wonder how
we started the first few
sentences about open source. And
then suddenly we're off talking
politics. Perhaps someone is nine
minutes into this podcast and
they're already going to, to
stop listening because we've said
something that they don't agree
with, but you make a
really interesting point on the
website, democracy.earth.earth is the top
level domain. You say we
are 21st century citizens interacting
with 19th century institutions based
on 15th century information technology.
What is democracy earth? And
talk to me about sandboxes
rather than from a country
perspective, but from a small
or medium size organizational perspective.
All right. So I mean,
democracy earth, what it tries
to do is to see
the internet as a political
jurisdiction and think about how
we can leverage existing technologies
like blockchain, for example, to,
to distribute votes among different
people. So, one, one concrete
example that we did one
sandbox is when the, the
referendum for peace in Colombia
took place, you could only
vote. So a couple of
things happened. The first one
is that referendums, what they
do is they, they turn
complex issues into a binary
decision. Right? And so what
happened with the reference? I
mean, Columbia is that they
got very complex and, and
comprehensive agreement got boiled down
to, do you want, do
you want the FARCs that
that's there? So if the
guerrilla forces to have a
role in the Colombian political
life yes or no, that
was pretty much eat. Right.
And so the consequence of
doing that was that that
was the issue that the
whole piece sort of hanged
on. And so it got
it wasn't approved, right? The,
the, the, the peace agreement
was revoked by the referendum.
So what we set out
to do before all of
this happened was open up
a space where we could
vote not in a single
issue, but we could, what
we did was we sort
of divided the referendum into
different classes, and we invited
people to vote on those
different classes. And from all
of the classes, the first
five got approved by a
landslide. And just the one
from the FARC got rejected
by a landslide. So that
was clearly the issue, right.
But almost all of the
agreement could have passed if
we would have done something
where, you know, a much
more comprehensive voting scenario. And
the second thing that happened
in Columbia was that the
diaspora wasn't allowed to vote.
Only the people in Columbia
could vote. And we found
that very unfair. Why, you
know, why do we expect
still in the 21st century
for citizens to physically go
to a place, you know,
to give them a voice
in the world. So we
wanted to give us space
for the diaspora to vote.
So this is a kind
of sandbox projects that I'm
talking about getting, driving issues
that where we could start
experimenting and piloting with this
kind of liquid democracy arrangements.
It was obviously as with
any innovation we need to
test and experiment. We don't
have the institutions that we
have because they were built
in a day. Like we
grew to have them here
and they developed into what
they are now. And so
every time we talk about
updating our institutions, I have
the feeling that there's this
expectation of, well, what are
you going to bring up
tomorrow? That's going to be
great. Right? And so our
sort of more humble path
is like, we're going to
be experimenting with these institutions
because the only way to
learn is to do is
by doing. And so, yeah,
that's sort of one example,
another example of sandboxes is
with climate change, for example,
climate change is an issue
that it's very clear that
it doesn't have to be
territorial. It doesn't make sense
that only nation States invite
invited to the table. So
that's the kind of experiments
that we're doing. Yeah. Yeah.
And I think that from
a technology perspective, the parts
that I think are very
interesting are the use of
the blockchain as an accounting
system to be incorruptible. So
that transactions cannot be removed.
You know, it's a kind
of right. Only an append
only. And then another one
that is interesting around liquid
democracy is the idea of
this binary vote. Like you
say, is simplistic. Why not
make it more like, for
lack of a better word,
user voice, where someone gets
a hundred votes and then
they can vote on different
pieces depending on how strongly
they feel about something. But
when they've done that, they've
then removed their votes from
something else. So if I
am a, a single issue
voter, that's fine, but then
I can't, I get less
of an opinion on another
issue that maybe I have
less interest in. So we
can make sort of much
more sophisticated arrangements today using
technology. And as you say,
look, I come from a
country I'm from Argentina. And
I come from a country
where ballot boxes are still
stolen. I'm burns after elections.
And so having something like
the blockchain that as you
say, it's an incorruptible ledger.
I think that's the most
attractive thing. So having storing
votes and decisions on, on
a tool like that, it's
extremely powerful, especially from someone
coming from, you know, Latin
America or countries where, you
know, the sanctity of the
vote is not exactly respected.
So this software is open
source and it is a
nonprofit, people can donate. People
can learn about a democracy
earth. How does it relate
to open collective? Are they
different sides of the same
coin? Are they in a
vector? How do those two
organizations relate to each other?
Well, I'm kind of the
connector at the moment. So
I was one of the
founders of democracy, earth and
democracy earth is like an
evolution of many years of
doing politics in Argentina. And,
and when we started, we
built a political party called
the net party and to
run for elections for Congress.
And with this idea that
we would only vote according
to what citizens decided on
a platform that was at
the time called democracy that
is still exists. And so
the idea was to, again,
flip that mandate and say,
what we're doing is bringing
into Congress, the voices of
thousands of citizens called one
to participate. But because the
way the seat, the system
is designed, they're sort of
left. You know, they're reduced
to being recipients of a
monologue, being able to cast
a vote every couple of
years. And that's about all
the input that the system
accepts from them. When we
did the, the net party,
it took us such a
long time to have our
political party approved. Because again,
it was like asking permission
for the status quo to
disrupt the status quo. So
government needed to approve our
political party in order for
us to receive donations, sort
of campaign contributions. And it
took a very long time
for them to do it.
Like it was insane. And
so when my business partner
and, and old friends, the
man who's the former founder
of Storify, you know, he
called me a couple of
years ago and like, Oh,
I have this project that
I've been thinking about scallop
and collective. And I'd like
you to come on board
as a cofounder. For me,
it was a no brainer
because that was essentially, he
was talking to me specifically
about the problem that we
were suffering, that we had
suffered, you know, gentiana without
political party. That is like,
you know, the amount of
red tape that is expected
from organizations in order to
start operating. It's a blocker
for most of these organizations,
it's a blocker for so
many amazing ideas to thrive
and experiment and build those
sandboxes. And so I just,
you know, I, I will
say that I was pregnant
nine months pregnant, so it
was good timing from him,
but I just jumped at
the opportunity of, of helping
create the organizations that I
thought would use liquid democracy
in the future because our,
our, the system is understands
corporations, either profit or nonprofit,
but understands corporations as the
political, economic and human unit,
or just the individual kind
of freelancer or atomized. But
there's something that sits in
between. It's a community, the
collective networks, mission-driven groups of
people that have amazing ideas.
They want to carry them
out. They want to test
them. They want to start
building support from them, but
in order to do it,
they need to have a
legal entity somewhere in the
world. And think about open
source projects, think about any
open source project that more
often than not just developers
that are come together online,
they create great technology together,
but they're from many different
countries. And that idea for
them building out an LLC,
five, a one C three,
a corporation where in the
United States, in Europe, in India,
right. In order to receive
contributions for their work on
starter. So that's where we
sort of come in with
open collective, you know, creating
these virtual associations and sharing
mutualizing resources among different collectives
and communities of people to
just help them focus on
what they do best it's
their work. Instead of having
to worry about legal entities
and accountants and lawyers and
equity, or cause a prescient
or an organization. I always
say that expecting an open
source project, a collective, a
mission driven network, a global
social movement to have a
command and control structure and
to have a precedent it's
like asking call that, of
course the prescient of the
internet is equally ridiculous, right?
Because it's just so far
away from how we operate,
how we are and how
we structure ourselves studies almost
impossible for us to fit
into these kind of squares
that government expects us to
fit. So OpenCollective what tries
to do is to enable
anyone to have a virtual
association and start raising some
funds and spend them in
full transparency without needing a
legal entity. And if any
of them, that's what they
want to do then that's
great. But you know, it's
like having one Negal entity
or collectivistic having one server
per content, you have a
nine it's simply, it doesn't
make sense. So just let
me help, help me understand
just in, in, in very
clear terms I could make,
I could, I have a
number of open source projects,
but it's just me. I
could go off and hire
lawyers if I were rich
and make a nonprofit, make
a five Oh one C,
but with open collective, I
can sign up. Is there
a  or are we
saying that this is a,
a construct that does not
require one in this context?
No, there is. And there's
a host and we call
them host organizations. So essentially
they OpenCollective platform. What it
has underneath is a network
of host organizations that are
organizations that what they do
is they virtualize their entities
and host these collectives. They
act as a service. They
receive the funds for these
collectives. They oversee their expenses
and then they reimburse them
or pay for their invoices
and because everything is done
through the platform and everything's
done in full transparency, it's
quite safe for these host
organizations to, to act as
hosts. So Alma collective, for
example, is the host organization
for all the open source
projects it's called, I'm sorry,
the open source collective. And
we filed already for a
five Oh one six, six
that we're waiting for approval.
And so if you go
online and create a collective
in opencollective.com/create or opensource slash
create that connects you directly
to get hub, then we
would be receiving those fundings,
those funds for you. And
whenever you want to spend
them, you need to submit
an invoice or a receipt
to be reimbursed to your
collective. And then we, we
cover that. Ah, interesting. So
for example, I've gone up
here to opencollective.com/webpack. Webpack is
a popular JavaScript tool. And
you know, I'm not logged
in, I'm just an anonymous
viewer. I can see here
that they have approximately a
hundred thousand dollar annual budget.
I can scroll down. I
can see someone just made
a $5 monthly donation. I
can click on, see all
expenses and I can look
down here and see someone
just took out $300 for
documentation. So I'm literally an
anonymous person and I'm looking
at their expenses. I can
even see here that one
of the organizers, Sean took
a Lyft ride and took
$51 and 29 cents out. So
there's no way to hide
or smuggle or launder money
in this process. It's completely
transparent. It's exactly. It's that
it's transparent. Like there's no
way you can get money
out of a platform if
it's not yeah. Expense that
is going to be public.
As far as the associations
of, of this generation are
transparent. Every system that we've
incorporated is, is designed for
corporations that compete in a
scarcity driven economy. I think
that our generation is different.
We want to collaborate. We
want to help one another.
We share information with one
another. We live and breathe
open source. And so like
our financial contributions for our,
our collectives and the way
we spend that money, they
should also be transpired. And
so what we set out
to do was like transparent
ledger, a financial ledger that
is transparent by design. Interesting.
Do you think, what would,
let me ask you, this
is the growth such that
this has hit a nerve.
This is more, it's not
a, go-fund me, it's more
of a Patrion for open
source. Is the growth of
your organization such that the
internet has accepted this and
says, yes, this was what
we were missing all the
time, For sure. In open
source that has been ours.
So we are not just
an open source. So we
are an open source platform,
but our collectives are not
only from the open source
community. We also have collectives
from like democracy earth. It's
a collective and we have
a collective for the city
of Brussels, for example. So
yeah, it's a city. So
any initiative citizen initiative in
Brussels, it's part of the
Brussels together collective. And so
what we do is which
has helped them mutualize all
of these resources. So instead
of every initiative, having their
own legal entity and accounting
fees, and again, lawyers, we
just share that amongst all
the initiatives on the network.
So it's much more efficient
and you can be up
and running in one day.
Okay. So this means that
when we go to the
homepage or when we hear
about open collective in the
news, because open source is
such an important part of
the internet, we hear about
it more, but if I
want to create a collective,
it could be a parent
teacher association or a robotics
club for kids, or any
a co op for gardening.
Absolutely. We have clubs, we
have political parties, we have
social movements and we have
a lot of open source
projects. I think that we've
had a lot of pull
from the open source community
that I think that you're
right in asking that question.
It really hit a nerve
there. I think that in
the opensource world, we still
need to shift gears on
the sponsor side of things.
So there's clearly a need
for open source projects to
have some sort of level
of, and just receive funding
and to receive it transparently.
But so what, what we
need to work more and
push more is so the
other side of the equation,
who's making those contributions and
those donations, and obviously a
Webpack is I expect heading
a lot of, of these
in terms of the funding
that they're getting and how
they are. So what we
are enabling them with open
collective is to sell office
hours to sub support, to
companies that are making contributions,
for example. So I company
makes her $10,000 contribution per
month. And it has, it
has access to 10 hours
of support from the Webpack
core team for that month.
And all of that would
be tracked on of that
strict. Absolutely. Yeah. That would
be amazing because I could
definitely see a company saying,
well, I love Webpack. I
want to give a thousand
dollars a month and I
want to have that kind
of, I want to have
them on retainer. For example,
I have legal insurance through
a company called prepaid legal.
I've never actually used it,
but it's nice to know
that it's available if I
need their support for someone.
Yeah. So what they do
also is like they do
one day workshops inside of
the companies as well for
like subscriptions where testing now
I knew, and I think
this is super interesting. Like
there's a lot of people
who have very popular websites
and that they want to
also give back to the
open source community, but they
don't necessarily have funding right
themselves. And so something that
we are that we're testing
now is having using an
ad network called carbon ads
and to place ads in
those websites. And then all
revenue goes straight to an
OpenGov active, so to Webpack
or to the open source
collective. So it's a way
for online publishers that have
popular networks, it popular websites
to be able to contribute
back to open source as
well. So those kinds of
experiments are the kind of
things that we do everyday,
like would rack our brains,
trying to think of ways
where we help in how
we going to help open
source projects find a path
towards sustainability. Hmm. So what
would you say to the
listeners, what that date, what
they can do, can they
contribute? Should they just go
and try to find their,
their favorite organization and, and,
and become a sponsor? Can
they sponsor OpenCollective directly So
they can do one of
those things. They can sponsor
the open source collective directly.
This that would go to
the umbrella organization. It would
help us fund the fiber
one to six that we've
created and we're waiting for
approval, or they can find
their, you know, open source
project that they, and give
them something, anything, $2 a
month, whatever, or just a
one time, $25 donation, whatever
anyone can afford, everything helps.
And also we are open
source. So if someone out
there has a, an idea
of how we can help
or electives get revenue, you
know, like this ad project
that I was mentioning, or
we, for example, we integrate
it, but we, you know,
with Threadless. So if you
have a collective, you can
sell swag on line now
and all the earnings go
to your collective. So anything
like that, you know, we're
always looking for creative ways
of helping our collectives get
more funding and structure their
organizations better. This is a,
it's definitely a very new,
interesting way of thinking about
governance. How do you make
sure that the people who
are involved are really the
people. If someone decided that
if I decided to hijack
a organization and declare that
I was in charge and
take the money, how would
that be possible? It wouldn't
sell at first because the
only way of creating an
open source collective is through
GitHub. You actually need to
be a contributor to that
gig. He'd have repo. If
not, it just won't show
up. You can say, I
have what I can not
be a contributor to Webpack.
So that's one, one thing.
And then the other one
is every time someone submits
an expense, the community instruct
prove it. And then the
host organization that in this
case, it's the open source
collective pays for it. So
the open source collective doesn't
pay for any pending expenses.
So it has like sort
of seal of approval from
the core team of that
collective before the host even
thinks about paying it. That's
really smart. It just, it
does, it does seem like
this will scale. And it
sounds like as you move
into new kinds of organizations,
that this could become the
way that people support any
kind of collective on the
internet. Oh no. So far
it's super useful for organizations
that have multiple local chapters
that are growing Cory Santelli.
So one, for example, now
is operation code. They are
teaching veterans how to code
and help them get jobs
in the tech sector. And
so they have their
already. And what they do
is they're the host of
all of their ecosystem. So
if you want to start
an operation code in Seattle
or in, I don't know,
San Francisco, wherever you are,
they can host you. There
acts as your host. So
you have their sort of
umbrella organization. And again, you
can start operating that very
day and start raising funds,
locally, manage your budget transparently.
They take a fee for
their strategic costs that they
incur. And then you are
up and running with operation
code, same way, women who
code, for example, women who
code is a host and
open, and they have 72
cities around the world hosted
on their own five one,
two, three. Fantastic. I noticed
that because I mean, I'm
in Portland, Oregon and women
who code Portland uses it
extensively. Yep. Yep. So women
who code Portland, they don't
have a favorite one C
three, they're just a virtual
association hosted in women who
code. Right. Right. And I've
actually done volunteer work with
them and I can submit
an expense. For example, if
I were going to take
an Uber to go and
give a talk there. Absolutely.
So for example, another really
cool example that we did
was during the no Muslim
ban campaign last year, not
sorry, early this year, we
created a no Muslim ban
collective. And we started paying
for the Lyft rides, pizza,
water photocopies for all the
lawyers that were in San
Francisco airport, working for free
to help people that were
stuck behind the, as a
consequence of the ban. And,
and so we could have
that up and running in
two seconds. And the funding,
the funds went to ,
that's a political organization called
engine and advocacy organization. And
then we've been reimbursing lawyers
for like the whole week.
So lawyers, if you were
working pro bono, helping people
that were stuck in the
airport, we would, you would
just submit your Lyft, right.
And we would pay for
it or the, you know,
or whatever you had to
eat or the parking fees
or whatever. Very cool. So
people can learn about opencollective@opencollectivedotcomandtheycanseedemocracyearthatdemocracy.earth
and they can find you
on Twitter as well. Yeah,
I'm,  on Twitter and
at open collect, it's our
Twitter handle for open collective.
Fantastic. Thank you so much
for chatting with me today.
Thank you, Scott, for having
me. This has been another
episode of Hansel minutes and
we'll see you again next
week.